#LyX 2.0 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 413
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_amsmath 1
\use_esint 1
\use_mhchem 1
\use_mathdots 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Maximum Likelihood Estimation and Conductance in the Neural Engineering
 Framework
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Main points
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
The framework assumes linear synaptic integration, i.e.
 the net current that drives a neuron is w'r, where w is a vector of synaptic
 weights and r is a vector of presynaptic spike rates.
 This is sort-of realistic sometimes, but there are important nonlinearities
 in synapses.
 NEF models also typically assume that spike rates vary as a cosine-like
 function of stimulus variables (often true but not always) and that spike
 rates are pretty reliable (unrealistic but not a strict constraint).
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Our goal is to extend the NEF to another regime in which divisive nonlinearities
 are prominent, presynaptic spike rates are highly variable, and response
 profiles are more Gaussian than cosine (also often true).
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
In this case the simplest possible neural circuit may actually do something
 quite similar to maximum likelihood estimation.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Stimulus
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
If a presynaptic population has Gaussian tuning curves 
\begin_inset Formula $r(s)$
\end_inset

 of equal width over stimulus value 
\begin_inset Formula $s$
\end_inset

, uniform distribution of preferred stimuli, and Poisson spiking, then the
 maximum likelihood estimate is 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\hat{s}_{ML}=\frac{\sum_{i}r_{i}s_{i}}{\sum_{i}r_{i}}
\]

\end_inset

where 
\begin_inset Formula $s_{i}$
\end_inset

 is the preferred stimulus and 
\begin_inset Formula $r_{i}$
\end_inset

is the spike rate of the 
\begin_inset Formula $i^{th}$
\end_inset

 neuron.
 We can generalize this to non-uniform widths, etc.
 and alternative functions of s (e.g.
 
\begin_inset Formula $s^{2}$
\end_inset

) by finding weights 
\begin_inset Formula $\psi_{i}$
\end_inset

 that optimally decode the desired function from normalized responses 
\begin_inset Formula $\frac{r_{i}}{\sum_{i}r_{i}}$
\end_inset

.
 This may be related to another regime of the NEF with Poisson spiking,
 Gaussian tuning, and ML-like decoding rather than periodic spiking, cosine
 tuning, and optimal linear decoding.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
However, it requires that we have feedforward division.
 We need the above denominator to appear in the post-synaptic neuron.
 This would probably be related to inhibition.
 The circuit might look similar to the Parisien transform (see right hand
 side of figure 1 in Parisien, C., Anderson, C.
 H., & Eliasmith, C.
 (2008).
 Solving the problem of negative synaptic weights in cortical models.
 Neural Computation, 20(6), 1473–94).
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Division Mechanism
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
[From Tripp 2012: Inhibitory shunting has been proposed as a particularly
 simple divisive mechanism (e.g.
 Carandini & Heeger, 1994; Kouh & Poggio, 2008).
 Inhibitory shunting has a primarily divisive effect on membrane potential,
 due to the similarity of GABA receptor reversal potential and typical resting
 membrane potentials.
 However, the situation is complicated by the fact that shunting also simultaneo
usly changes the membrane time constant.
 In single-compartment integrate-and-fire models, these two changes combine
 to make the net effect of inhibition on a cell’s firing rate primarily
 subtractive (Holt & Koch, 1997; Dayan & Abbott, 2001).
 This does not seem to preclude division in more complex cell models, e.g.
 when inhibitory and spike-related shunting occur in separate compartments.
 Shunting may also play a part in more complex division mechanisms (Abbott
 & Chance, 2005; Chance et al., 2002; Doiron et al., 2001; Prescott & Koninck,
 2003; S.
 J.
 Mitchell & Silver, 2003).]
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Chance, F.
 S., Abbott, L.
 F., & Reyes, A.
 D.
 (2002).
 Gain modulation from background synaptic input.
 Neuron, 35(4), 773–82.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fellous, J.-M., Rudolph, M., Destexhe, a, & Sejnowski, T.
 .
 (2003).
 Synaptic background noise controls the input/output characteristics of
 single cells in an in vitro model of in vivo activity.
 Neuroscience, 122(3), 811–829.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Mitchell, S.
 J., & Silver, R.
 A.
 (2003).
 Shunting inhibition modulates neuronal gain during synaptic excitation.
 Neuron, 38(3), 433–45.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Prescott, S.
 a, & De Koninck, Y.
 (2003).
 Gain control of firing rate by shunting inhibition: roles of synaptic noise
 and dendritic saturation.
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
 America, 100(4), 2076–81.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The first thing to figure out is how to get division from inhibition.
 It looks like there are multiple ways (see papers) but we want a relatively
 simple mechanism that we can use as an approximate model within the NEF.
 We probably do not want to introduce: 1) spatially extended neurons (stick
 with single compartment neurons).
 2) Saturation of 
\begin_inset Formula $P_{s}$
\end_inset

 (probability of synaptic receptor being open) -- so we assume 
\begin_inset Formula $P_{s}<<1$
\end_inset

.
 
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
